.. role:: cite

.. raw:: latex

   \providecommand*\DUrolecite[1]{\cite{#1}}

.....
TITLE
.....

.. raw:: latex

 \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
 \setlength{\parskip}{8pt}
 \thispagestyle{empty}
 \pagebreak


---------------
Project Summary
---------------

**Overview**.  21st-century technological and social advances pose challenges
to STEM educators.  Interdisciplinary training and specialization are both
increasingly important for meeting the demands of the 21st-century labor
market, which more than ever before is comprised of niche occupations.

Large class sizes make it a challenge for instructors to provide immediate
feedback on problems; to supply a large volume of problems for adequate
practice; or to give individual attention to students, adapting the problems to
the student's skill or engage a student's interest.

..  TODO: citations of some statements above

**Intellectual Merit**.  Instructional technology and learning analytics offer
means to enhance STEM education in ways which resolve the issues described
above.  In particular, an instructional system should contain software which
supplies a student with specialized problems adapted to that student's skill
level, and auto-grades them for immediate feedback.  Such a system should
ensure a smooth progression of coverage along a hierarchy of cognitive
functions (e.g. one which uses Bloom's taxonomy); yet in spite of its
individualized treatment, it should remain fair to the students by holding
difficulty and valuation of student responses equal.  

We propose to implement such an intelligent tutoring system (ITS).

**Broader Impacts**.  Everyone benefits from the use of an ITS: students,
educators, administrators, even reviewers (e.g. from accreditation boards, or
others who wish to ascertain the nature and quality of instruction).
Targetting interdisciplinary interests by design, the ITS is friendly to
specialist students.  

The system's auto-grader is objective and equitably serves ethnic minorities,
women, low-SES, the disabled, and other groups traditionally underrepresented
in STEM.  The system uses demographic information it in its problem-scheduling
algorithm to supply problems which are thought to benefit students who are part
of these groups (e.g., if it so happens that women benefit from a certain
problem, it is more likely to be given to women).  Thus it acknowledges
individual and group differences in serving material. 

------------
Introduction
------------

Curricula are mitotic: when the demand for specialized labor increases,
curricula fork into concentrations. This process is potentially time-consuming,
however; and even in spite of curricular developments, a student may not
receive enough focus on the specialization in general education or core
courses. For example, a computer science student who wishes to do computational
chemistry may take courses from either field, but never see the application of
combined material toward a real-world problem.

It should be simple for educators and accreditation boards to verify that any
given student meets the curricular requirements, as well as specialized
training requirements for a chosen field, based on the material the student has
been served and the problems the student has solved.

------------------
Intellectual Merit
------------------

Detailed explanation of the problem.

-----------------
Literature Review
-----------------

-----------------
Proposed Research
-----------------

==========
Innovation
==========

This section discusses the following points of innovation:

 + Integration with Bloom's taxonomy for progression
 + Interdisciplinary; supports wide array of domains
 + Uses learning analytics (LA) to profile students and serve problems
 + Uses demographic information to ensure equitable service

=======================
Advancing Understanding
=======================

The ITS has the capacity to advance understanding of the effect of educational
practices by:

 + generating legible profile data on students
 + supporting automated educational experiments
 + modelling cognitive load and engagement
 + tracking changes in trait ability

===================
Promoting Broad Use
===================

The ITS development model may converge to a broad adoption by use of

 + agreement with the user base
 + modular and customizable design
 + customizability of the user interface
 + usage analysis

What is meant by "agreement with the user base" is the following.  A department
at a university may be informally interviewed beforehand and asked what
features of the ITS they would like in order for the ITS to be adopted and
well-received by the department.  The department agrees to use the software for
a time provided the features are implemented to its liking.  The software then
ensures adoption by that department.  It may be reviewed and 

To support only a subset of features which the department or user base
requires, the design of the system will be made modular to ensure that it is
simple for that user base to use.  


--------------
Broader Impact
--------------

---------------
Management Plan
---------------

------------------
Metrics of Success
------------------

-------------
Prior Support
-------------
